All chapters: organizational cleanup (#473)
worldbank/dime-data-handbook: chapters/0-introduction.tex

\begin{fullwidth}
Welcome to \textit{Development Research in Practice: The DIME Analytics Data Handbook}.
This book is intended to teach all users of development data
how to handle data effectively, efficiently, and ethically.
It takes lessons, tools, and processes that emerged from the DIME portfolio
and compiles them into a single narrative about doing data work
that we hope will provide a foundation for these professional skills.

DIME generates high-quality and operationally relevant data and research
to transform development policy, help reduce extreme poverty, and secure shared prosperity.
It develops customized data and evidence ecosystems to produce actionable information
and recommend specific policy pathways to maximize impact.
DIME conducts research in 60 countries with 200 agencies, leveraging a
US\$180 million research budget to shape the design and implementation of
US\$18 billion in development finance.
DIME also provides advisory services to 30 multilateral and bilateral development agencies.

> The DIME team includes four primary topic pillars,

Author: 31f26105f975eb43e65d75d3b79fd8cf1f0d2b89

has included dozens of research economists,
and, over the years, has employed hundreds of full-time research assistants, field coordinators, and staff.
This group taken together, has conducted over 325 impact evaluations.
This book exists to take advantage of that concentration and scale of research,
to synthesize many resources for data collection and research,
and to make DIME tools available to the larger community of development researchers.

As part of its broader mission mission, DIME invests in public goods (such as this book)
to improve the quality and reproducibility of development research around the world.
One key early innovation at DIME was the creation of the DIME Analytics team,
who are responsible for writing and maintaining this book.

> This team has five full-time staff and several part-time members,

Author: c1fa7edce745348b3c0f65dacd6af63ea7a47535

and are collectively responsible for ensuring the quality of research practices across DIME.
This is done through an intensive, collaborative innovation cycle:
DIME Analytics onboards and supports research assistants and field coordinators,
provides standard tools and workflows to all teams,
delivers intensive support when new tasks or challenges arise,
and then develops and integrates lessons from those engagements to bring to the full team.
In that way the Analytics team is DIME's method of ``institutionalizing''
a set of tools and practices, developed and refined over time,
that give the unit a common base of knowledge and practice.

> This book is targeted to everyone who interacts with development data:

Reviewer: this sentence feels like it should be the start of a new paragraph, it's a jump from the description of analytics. needs a transition, maybe something like 'this book is an effort to share that knowledge base outside of DIME. It is targeted to ... "

Reviewer: or, maybe it goes better with (or just after) the second paragraph in the next section, that describes what the book is trying to do?

graduate students, research assistants, policymakers, and empirical researchers.
It aims to be a highly practical resource so the reader can
immediately begin to collaborate effectively on large, long-term research projects
that already use the methods and tools outlined in this book.

\end{fullwidth}

%------------------------------------------------

> \section{Doing credible research at scale}

Reviewer: this section header no longer seems applicable, at least to me it made reference to DIME's scale and how Analytics grew out of that

when it should be done; and how to implement it according to best practices.
We will use broad terminology throughout this book to refer to some typical research team members:
\textbf{principal investigators (PIs)} who are responsible for
the overall design and stewardship of the study;
\textbf{field coordinators (FCs)} who are responsible for
the implementation of the study on the ground;
and \textbf{research assistants (RAs)} who are responsible for
handling data processing and analytical tasks.

We will not always give a lot of highly specific implementation details in this text,
but will often point you to where they can be found on the \textbf{DIME Wiki}.\sidenote{Like this:
\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Primary_Data_Collection}}
The DIME Wiki is one of DIME Analytics' flagship products,
a free online collection of our resources and best practices.\sidenote{
\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org}}
This book complements the DIME Wiki by providing a structured narrative
of the data workflow for a typical research project.
The Wiki, by contrast, provides unstructured but detailed information
on how to complete each task, and links to further practical resources.

> \section{Adopting reproducible analytical practices through code}

Reviewer: I think this section is where we want to address Arianna's comment that "The introduction should have a clear motivation of why data and not only research design is important for generating credible evidence. Here you need to make reference to actual research on the perils of poor data on research conclusions." that's the only major comment of hers that i see as still pending.

> Modern quantitative research relies heavily on statistical software tools.

Reviewer: suggest removing this sentence

Many development researchers come from economics and statistics backgrounds
and often understand code to be a means to an end rather than an output itself.
We believe that this must change somewhat:
in particular, we think that development practitioners
must think about their code and programming workflows
just as methodologically as they think about their research workflows,
and think of code and data as research outputs, just as manuscripts and briefs are.
To this end, DIME now maintains strict portfolio-wide standards
about how analytical code should be maintained and made accessible
before, during, and after release or publication.
This is because we see the code as the ``recipe'' for the analysis:
it tells others exactly what was done,
how they can do it again in the future,
and provides a roadmap and knowledge base for further original work.
DIME Analytics is responsible for maintaining and enforcing these standards,
and they are intended to cooperatively improve the quality of the work done by

> every member of the DIME team, never to police or punish them.

Reviewer: suggest removing

Similarly, we assume throughout all of this book
that you are going to do nearly all of your data work though code.
It is often \textit{possible} to perform nearly all the relevant tasks
through the interactive user interface in a statistical software,
or even through non-specialized software such as Excel.
However, we strongly advise against it.
The reason for this is the set of
transparency, reproducibility, and credibility principles
that we discuss in Chapter 1.
Performing every task through written code
creates a record of every task you performed.
It also prevents direct interaction
with the data files that could lead to non-reproducible processes.
Finally, we have invested a lot of time in developing code as a learning tool:
the examples we have written and the commands we provide
are designed to provide a framework for common practice
across the entire DIME team, so that everyone is able to
read, review, and provide feedback on the work of others

> starting frmo teh same basic ideas about how various tasks are done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
starting from the same basic ideas about how various tasks are done.
```

Most specific code tools have a learning and adaptation process,
meaning you will become most comfortable with each tool
only by using it in real-world work.
To support your process of learning reproducible tools and workflows,
we reference free and open-source tools wherever possible,
and point to more detailed instructions when relevant.
Stata, as a proprietary software, is the notable exception here
due to its persistent popularity in development economics and econometrics.\sidenote{

>   \url{https://aeadataeditor.github.io/presentation-20191211/\#9}}

Reviewer: are we removing all non-dime wiki references?

Author: in the next PR, yes, leave for now so we can do all at once

This book also includes, as an appendix,
the \textbf{DIME Analytics Stata Style Guide}
that we use in our work, which provides
standards for coding in Stata so that code styles
can be harmonized across teams for easier understanding and reuse of code.
Stata has relatively few resources of this type available,
and the one that we have created and shared here
we hope will be an asset to all its users.

> \section{Ensuring high-quality data through good coding}

Reviewer: perhaps rename this to something like 'Standardizing processes to ensure high-quality data work'? i don't love that exact phrasing but my aim is to make this more clearly differentiated from the section above and to emphasize the point about process standardization because that is relevant beyond stata code.

Actually with another read-through, i'm still not convinced this belongs in the intro. i suggest moving it to chapter 1 (since fundamental to reproducibility) or 2 (as part of setting up / structuring data work). Let's discuss.

which involves managing and collating different types of information,
often at different levels of analysis and different stages in time.
Keeping a clear, human-readable record of these code and data structures is critical.
Finally, as data is collected, code tools must be used to validate its quality,
organize and manage the linkages between datasets,
resolve and correct errors that occur in the process of data acquisition,
and, ultimately, create and analyze the measures that
are the motivation for the research study.

A breakdown in any part of this data pipeline
means that the data that are acquired become unreliable.
If that happens, the results cannot be faithfully interpreted
as being an accurate picture of the intended research design.
Because we almost never have ``laboratory'' settings in this type of research,
such a failure has a very high cost:
we will have wasted the investments that were made into knowledge generation,
with little ability to reproduce or recreate the situation
where we intended to operate the research project.
Hence accurate and reproducible data management is a core component
of the credibility of development research.

> \section{Outline of this book}

Reviewer: it feels like this comes late in the intro. or that at least we might want to clarify very early how the overall structure follows the project cycle, say up in the section where we explain what the book aims to do.

This book covers each stage of an empirical research project, from design to publication.
We start with ethical principles to guide empirical research,
focusing on research reproducibility, transparency, and credibility.

> In Chapter 1, we outline a set of practices that help to ensure that

Reviewer: perhaps make each chapter description a short stand-alone paragraph?

aside from one relatively recent handbook on reproducibility.\cite{christensen2019transparent}
This book aims to fill that gap.
It covers data workflows at all stages of the research process,
from design to data acquisition and analysis.

The Analytics team has invested many hours over many years
learning from data work across DIME's portfolio,
identifying inefficiencies and barriers to success,
developing tools and trainings, and standardizing best-practice workflows at DIME.
It has also invested significant energy in the language and materials
used to teach these workflows to new team members,
and, in many cases, in software tools that support these workflows explicitly.
DIME team members often work on diverse portfolios of projects
with a wide range of teammates, and we have found
that standardizing core processes across all projects
results in higher-quality work with fewer opportunities to make mistakes.
In that way, the Analytics team is DIME's method of ``institutionalizing''
tools and practices, developed and refined over time,
that give the department a common base of knowledge and practice.

> In 2018 and 2019, for example, DIME adoped universal reproducibility checks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2018, for example, DIME adoped universal reproducibility checks
```
Even if it is more correct to say _2018 and 2019_ for some reason, can't we just say 2018 to make it flow better?

conducted by the Analytics team;
the lessons from this practice helped move the DIME team
from where 50\% of submitted papers in 2018
required significant revision to pass
to where 64\% of papers passed in 2019 without revision required.

> This book is intended to share these ideas, practices, and tools
> with everyone who interacts with development data:
> graduate students, research assistants, policymakers, and empirical researchers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This book is intended to share these ideas, practices, and tools
with everyone who interacts with development data.
```

> graduate students, research assistants, policymakers, and empirical researchers.

Reviewer 2: @bbdaniels

\begin{fullwidth}
Welcome to \textit{Development Research in Practice}.
This book is intended to teach all users of development data
how to handle data effectively, efficiently, and ethically.

> An empirical revolution has changed the face of research economics rapidly over the last decade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An empirical revolution has changed the face of development economics research rapidly over the last decade.
```

> Today, especially in the development subfield, working with raw data --

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, working with raw data --
```

> whether collected through surveys or acquired from ``big'' data sources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
whether collected through surveys,
shared by partner organizations
or acquired from ``big'' data sources
```
We should mention the admin data aspect here

You should also understand how the various stages tie together,
and what inputs and outputs are required from each.
Then, the references and links contained in each chapter
will lead you to detailed descriptions of individual
ideas, tools, and processes when you need to implement the tasks yourself.
In particular, highly specific implementation details
will often be found on the \textbf{DIME Wiki}.\sidenote{Like this:
\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Primary_Data_Collection}}

The DIME Wiki is one of DIME Analytics' flagship products,
a free online collection of our resources and best practices.\sidenote{
\url{https://dimewiki.worldbank.org}}
This book complements the DIME Wiki by providing a structured narrative
of the data workflow for a typical research project.
The Wiki, by contrast, provides unstructured but detailed and up-to-date information
on how to complete each task, and links to further practical resources.
For some implementation portions where precise code is particularly important,
we provide minimal code examples either in the book or on the DIME Wiki.
All code guidance is software-agnostic, but code examples are provided in Stata.

> While adopting the workflows and mindsets described in this book requires an up-front cost,

Author: 55d429da06dc40c33cfa1951c3529a4e1450491c

at all stages of the research process.

\section{Handling original data is a core research task}

An empirical revolution has changed the face of development research rapidly over the last decade.
Increasingly, researchers are working not just with complex data,
but with \textit{original} data:
datasets either collected by the research team themselves
or acquired through a unique agreement with a project partner.
Original data, especially those collected or assembled by the team themsselves,
requires that the team carefully document how the data was created, handled, and analyzed.
These tasks now contribute as much weight to the quality of the evidence
as the research design and the statistical approaches do.
At the same time, the scope and scale of empirical research projects is expanding:
more people are working on the same data over longer timeframes.
For that reason, the central premise of this book is that data work is a ``social process''.
This means that the many different people on a team need to have the same ideas
about what is to be done, and when and where and by whom,
so that they can collaborate effectively on a large, long-term research project.

> In the past, these processes were often treated as a ``black box'' in research.

Author: 94cf97599aaeecb7d45dda54da2011dbf0a897a5

> In the past, these processes were often treated as a ``black box'' in research.

Reviewer: great

to figure out what a code chunk is trying to do.
\textbf{Style}, finally, is the way that the non-functional elements of your code convey its purpose.

> Elements like spacing, indentation, and naming (or lack thereof) can make your code much more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elements like spacing, indentation, and naming conventions (or lack thereof) can make your code much more
```
Everything has names, so we can't just say _naming_...

Instead, this book will teach you how to think about all aspects of your research from a data perspective,
how to structure research projects to maximize data quality,
and how to institute transparent and reproducible workflows.

The Analytics team has invested many hours over many years
in creating these data workflows for DIME team members to follow

> throughout the research process.

Author: 94cf97599aaeecb7d45dda54da2011dbf0a897a5

This book is intended to share these ideas, practices, and tools
with everyone who interacts with development data:
graduate students, research assistants, policymakers, and empirical researchers.

Whether it is collected through surveys, shared by partner organizations,
or acquired from ``big'' data sources like sensors, satellites, or call data records,
data handling and documentation is a key skill for researchers and staff.
There are many places where standard processes and documentation practices
are important to accurately convey and implement the intended research design in reality.\cite{vilhuber_lars_2020_3911311}
For example, statistical code is typically an essential part of
research design components such as sampling, randomization, and power analysis.
As data is obtained, its quality must be validated,
linkages between datasets must be organized and managed,
and errors must be identified and corrected.
Once raw data is in hand, researchers must create and analyze the final measures that
are the motivation for the research study;
then they must conduct the actual analyses.
The exact details of each step of this work needs to be documented and made available

> alongside any final research outputs.

Reviewer: I think the examples need work -- they show different points in the research cycle where documentation is needed but don't make clear why standardizing processes helps / is needed

Author: Tried more context in 2685c924c280c04c7e4703fefde1f716197ae553

Researchers therefore need to maintain records of the handling and processing of all their data,
which involves managing and collating different types of information,
often at different levels of analysis and different stages in time.
The tight linkages between documentation, data quality, and policy decisions
have long been recognized by research entities such as government statistical agencies,\cite{jepdataquality}
and must now be imported into the practice of researchers who collect original data
rather than relying on data that comes from, for example, highly-experienced statistical agencies.

> A breakdown in any part of this data pipeline

Reviewer: this paragraph is a great addition

Hence accurate and reproducible data management and analysis is a core component
of the credibility of development research.
Being able to accurately and reproducibily implement these tasks
is essential to the success and credibility of any modern research output.

\section{Documenting data work with standardized code}

One method of solving this problem in the social context
is what we refer to as \textbf{process standardization}.
Process standardization means that there is
little ambiguity about how something ought to be done,
and therefore the tools to do it can be set in advance.
Standard processes help other people understand your work.
Work should be well-documented in the sense that others can:
(1) quickly understand what a particular process or output is supposed to be doing;
(2) evaluate whether or not it does that thing correctly; and
(3) modify it efficiently either to test alternative hypotheses
or to adapt into their own work.

Modern quantitative research already relies heavily
on standardized statistical software tools,
written with various coding languages, to standardize analytical work.
Outputs like regression tables and data visualizations

> are creating using code in statistical software for two primary reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are created using code in statistical software for two primary reasons.
```

The first is that using a standard command or package ensures that the work is done right,
and the second is that it ensures the same procedure can be confirmed or checked
at a later date or using different data.
Keeping a clear, human-readable record of these code and data structures is critical.
While is often \textit{possible} to perform nearly all the relevant tasks
through an interactive user interface or even through software such as Excel,
this practice is strongly advised against.

> In the context of statistical analysis, this approach is widely accepted.

Reviewer: widely accepted? increasingly perhaps, with pressure from journals ...

Author: maybe this is not clear, it's meant to say that "everyone agrees analysis work should be coded" in contrast to, say, data work. does that make sense?

Reviewer: ah, that does make sense. it wasn't clear.

Author: 752fd32f596b4591e7d6453ee16b5bd1882e512b

To this end, DIME now maintains strict portfolio-wide standards
about how analytical code should be maintained and made accessible
before, during, and after release or publication.

> But the same is not yet true of the work that goes into preparing data for analysis,

Reviewer: this reads oddly, because the sentence immediately before is about DIME protocols, it sounds like we do not yet have protocols for work going into data preparation. i understand the point to be that although there is growing consensus (or at least pressure) for replication files that allow for scrutiny of analytical code, there is rarely such scrutiny of all the work that goes into preparing the analysis dataset.

Author: Trying: "Over the last few years, DIME has extended the same principles to preparing data for analysis,"?

61bd392f85e419c1f92e27e5bf3740ca30145aac

Correspondingly, a major contribution of DIME Analytics
has been tools and standard practices
for implementing these tasks using statistical software.
While we assume that you are going to do nearly all data work using code,
many development researchers come from economics and statistics backgrounds
and often understand code to be a means to an end rather than an output itself.
We believe that this must change somewhat:
in particular, we think that development practitioners
must think about their code and programming workflows
just as methodologically as they think about their research workflows,
and think of code and data as research outputs, just as manuscripts and briefs are.

This approach arises because we see the code as the ``recipe'' for the analysis.
The code tells others exactly what was done,
how they can do it again in the future,
and provides a roadmap and knowledge base for further original work.\cite{hamermesh2007replication}
Performing every task through written code
creates a record of every task you performed.\cite{ozier2019replication}
It also prevents direct interaction
with the data files that could lead to non-reproducible processes.\cite{chang2015economics}

> Finally, we have invested a lot of time in developing code as a learning tool:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, DIME Analytics has invested a lot of time in developing code as a learning tool:
```

but you should reference Stata help-files by writing \texttt{help [command]}
whenever you do not understand the command that is being used.
We hope that these snippets will provide a foundation for your code style.
Providing some standardization to Stata code style is also a goal of this team.

\section{Outline of this book}

This book covers each stage of an empirical research project, from design to publication.
We start with ethical principles to guide empirical research,
focusing on research reproducibility, transparency, and credibility.
In Chapter 1, we outline a set of practices that help to ensure that
research consumers can be confident in the conclusions reached,
and research work can be assumed and verified to be reliable.

> Chapter 2 will teach you to structure your data work to be organized
> and collaborative, while ensuring the privacy and security of research participants.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Chapter 2 will teach you to structure your data work for collaborative research, 
while ensuring the privacy and security of research participants.
```

> It discusses the importance of planning these data tools and structures work at the outset of the research project --

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It discusses the importance of planning the tools that will be used;
lays the groundwork to structure the research project at its outset --
```

> long before any data is acquired -- and provides suggestions for collaborative workflows and tools.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
long before any data is acquired --;
and provides suggestions for collaborative workflows and tools.
```

Author: This doesn't seem right, is this a typo @luizaandrade?

Reviewer 3: yes, it was just meant to be a new line :)

In Chapter 3, we turn to establishing a measurement framework,

> focusing specifically on how to translate research design to master datasets, create documentation of the structure of your data,
> and how to implement both simple and complex randomized designs reproducibly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
focusing specifically on how to translate research design to a data work plan
and how to implement both simple and complex randomized designs in a reproducible manner.
```

Chapter 4 covers data acquisition. We start with
the legal and institutional frameworks for data ownership and licensing,
dive in depth on collecting high-quality survey data,
and finally discuss secure data handling during transfer, sharing, and storage.
Chapter 5 teaches workflows for data processing.
It details how to construct ``tidy'' data at the appropriate units of analysis,
how to ensure uniquely identified datasets, and
how to routinely incorporate data quality checks into the workflow.
It also provides guidance on de-identification and cleaning of personally-identified data,
focusing on how to understand and structure data
so that it is ready for indicator construction and analytical work.
Chapter 6 discusses data analysis.
It begins with data construction, or the creation of new variables

> from the raw information collected or obtained in the field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from the raw data acquired or collected in the field.
```
